---
layout: post
title: "On the phenomenon of bullshit book ideas"
category: 
tags: []
---

David Graeber tweets (Hat tip: Dan Davies): ["Okay everybody what do
you think: Bullshit Jobs, the Book? Should I do it? A short
book. French and German publishers are
interested."](https://twitter.com/davidgraeber/status/393103123155537921)

An anthropologist wants to write a book about "bullshit jobs". Oh the
[irony](http://theinsanerobin.tumblr.com/post/11024245915)... But
seriously, this is an important phenomenon --- you might want to start
by reading his article ["On the Phenomenon of Bullshit
Jobs"](http://www.strikemag.org/bullshit-jobs/). (If your eyes start
to glaze over by the third paragraph that's okay. Graeber loves
repeating himself).


I recommend reading the article along with Tyler Cowen's [Average is
Over](http://www.amazon.com/Average-Is-Over-Powering-Stagnation/dp/0525953736/),
since Cowen points out *why* we will increasingly see more of an
emphasis on bullshit jobs (i.e. sales and marketing) in the
future. 

Short answer: because capital (in the form of computers and
 automation) is increasingly replacing labor, even more of the goods
 and services the world uses will be created by an even smaller
 elite. This is why *average is over* --- there is no future middle
 class of assembly line workers. However, the vanishingly small elite
 (call them the 1%) will be serviced by a new group that will be
 increasingly more prominent: a 10% sized class of supplicants who try
 ever harder to attract their attention and favor, primarily through
 marketing and sales. I quote from Average is Over:

> It sounds a little silly, but making high earners feel better in
> just about every part of their lives will be a major source of job
> growth in the future. At some point it is hard to sell more physical
> stuff to high earners, yet there is usually just a bit more room to
> make them feel better. Better about the world. Better about
> themselves. Better about what they have achieved.

> The growing importance of marketing integrates two seemingly
> unrelated features of the modern world: income inequality and
> increasing pressures on our attention. The more that earnings rise
> at the upper end of the distribution, the more competition there
> will be for the attention of the high earners and thus the greater
> the importance of marketing.

Think expensive yoga teachers, massage therapists, cooks, butlers, art
dealers, and all the professions that send us barreling straight back
towards the 20's (and earlier) in terms of income inequality. Is this
pretty terrible?  Yes. Is Graeber's anarchist vision the solution?
No. Should we probably advocate some form of basic income guarantee?
Probably, as long as we're okay with solidifying a permanent
underclass that looks [like
this](http://theumlaut.com/2013/10/16/a-vindication-of-juggalo-society/). (Which
we should be.)


Aside: Graeber's worldview is best exemplified in his book
"Debt". Debt started with a fantastic description of how money, trade,
and debt evolved through social norms in small groups, and was
generally a fun read in the initial hundred or so pages. By the time
you get to his deeply wrongheaded prescriptions, the whole book falls
apart. In this article, Graeber (somewhat) sticks to describing an
increasing and worrying trend (the rise of bullshit jobs), so it's a
pretty decent read (except for the parts that are just ranting).
