---
layout: post
title: "The Lucas Critique"
category: 
tags: []
---

Apologies to my economist friends, but this has nothing to do with the
[Lucas
critique](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucas_critique). Instead, this
is about George Lucas and the writing of the six Star Wars movies.

The original trilogy (1977-1983) were universally popular. The prequel
trilogy (1999-2005) are widely regarded as a bad move. How can this be
the case? The six Star Wars movies are pretty unique in that George
Lucas was the mastermind behind all of them, so you can't really blame
personnel changes on this result. Instead, I think that the fall in
quality is a side effect of the typical creative process, and the time
gap between the two trilogies.

If you examine [the original Lucas written
drafts](http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/The_Star_Wars:_Rough_Draft) for
the first Star Wars movie, there's a whole bunch of stuff in there
that's utter bollocks. There's no coherent plot, there's explicit
contradiction of what would later be the greatest movie twist (that
Darth Vader is Luke's father). It's cringe-worthy stuff at best, and
completely incoherent at worst. There was definitely nothing in there
that could go on to be the greatest science fiction movie series of
all time.

Except, of course, there was. What happened? I think the creative
process went like this:

> George: This is a movie about the royal Starkiller family of
> Utapau. Darth Vader wants to control Utapau so he sets out to
> kidnap one of the Starkiller children.

> Underling: No, that's ridiculous.

> George: Okay. The Starkiller patriarch is dead for unknown
> reasons. Their son wants to go on an adventure, and is chased by
> Darth Vader. In the end the Starkiller father is resurrected, and
> they defeat Darth Vader.

> Underling: That's mildly better. But can we cut out the resurrection
> part?

> George: Okay. They defeat Darth Vader with the help of a daring
> mercenary named Han Solo.

> Underling: Can we change the awful name?

> George: How's Luke Skywalker?

The point is, creativity is a process of iterative refinement. For
every good idea George had, he had nineteen terrible ones. And if you
think that's unfair criticism, you haven't tried to actually create
anything. A 5% hit rate is amazing. The reality is more like 0.001%
and you're lucky it's not 0% (for a view to what 0% looks like, I can
show you some of my past piano compositions).

However, by the time the sequels roll around, twenty years have
passed. The original trilogy was iconic, revered, and George Lucas is
a cult hero. Nobody is going to stand up and criticize Lucas. Here's
how the conversations probably went:

> George: We're going to do an entire movie about baby Darth
> Vader. He'll be an annoying prat who's completely unsympathetic
> despite being a slave. We'll throw in a ludicrous side plot where he
> goes racing in a "pod" that he built from scrap parts for half the
> movie to establish that he's a total genius. Also midichlorians.

> Underling's inner monologue: That's terrible! What is he thinking?
> But wait. This is GEORGE LUCAS! The great George Lucas who came up
> with the greatest movie twist of all time! And nobody saw that one
> coming despite the fact that "Vader" is literally the German word
> for "father" and "Darth" sounds like "dark"! He really understands
> Darth Vader and how this character came about to be the greatest
> scifi villain of all time! Besides who am I? I'm just a stupid
> underling.

> Underling's actual response: That sounds fantastic, George.


And there you have it. Three prequel movies of total fucking garbage.
