---
layout: post
title: "More evidence that college is about consumption, not investment"
category: 
excerpt: "Ask yourself if there was any luxury that you had during college that
was beyond your means post-college. Was this luxury an obvious and
direct investment in your future earning power? If not, then the
answer is that it was consumption."
tags: []
---

Ask yourself if there was any luxury that you had during college that
was beyond your means post-college. Was this luxury an obvious and
direct investment in your future earning power? If not, then the
answer is that it was consumption.

Consumption is fine --- in a capitalist economy that's how you buy
happies with money. Where it's questionable is if it is short term
consumption financed by long term borrowing. And the evidence shows
that most of the cost of college fits this description. It's a pretty
serious failing of society that we let 18 year olds go into serious
debt for the sake of 4 years of consumption that they will be paying
back for decades.



Here's [one such
luxury](http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702303448104579151592151090528)
so *out there* that 99% of students will never be able to afford it
even if they had successful high income lives.

The easiest way to measure that this is consumption is by checking off
all the ways in which your immediate post-college life was materially
worse off than your college years. If you can't afford a 24 hour
10,000 sq. ft. gym membership, why were you paying for it (indirectly
or directly) for 4 years? I'm skeptical of non-empirical claims that
these luxuries are really investments because they "enrich lives
during formative years", etc. Are they *so formative* that you should
debt-finance them?