---
layout: post
title: "The Metagame"
category: 
tags: []
---

I first got into sports in middle school, when I started watching
English soccer and international cricket. I watched every Arsenal game
for about 3 years. I still watch the occasional one, although "Arsenal
fan" would be somewhat of a stretch description.

Sports as Tribal Ritual
-----------------------

Sports serves two purposes --- the first is simply entertainment as a
*game*. I define "game" as something that people partake in for
primarily *intellectual* enjoyment. Watching sports has broad appeal,
and everyone partakes in the intellectual side through fantasy
football, monday morning quarterbacking, tactical breakdowns, etc. 

The second purpose is tribal affiliation. Tribal affiliation is why
most sports are location based --- Baseball teams, NFL franchises, and
European soccer clubs all have roots in specific cities or regions
where the majority of their fanbase is located. Additional evidence
that sports teams are tribally oriented is by the fact that there is
tonnes of hate for [glory
hunters](http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Glory%20Hunter),
the [Prawn Sandwich
Brigade](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prawn_sandwich_brigade), and
constant debate as to what constitutes a "true fan".

I propose that mainstream sports maintain large fanbases mostly due to
the tribal effect. There is simply not much intellectual stimulation
remaining in football, baseball, soccer, or any other game. Sure,
there is some on the surface (should Arsene Wenger buy a new
striker?), but there isn't deep strategic evolution in mainstream
sport strategy.

The last major tactical innovations in Soccer that I can recall are:

1. The elimination of the back pass.

2. The introduction and solidification of the [Makelele
role](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claude_Mak%C3%A9l%C3%A9l%C3%A9#Real_Madrid).

Reasonable people can argue for what does and does not consist a
"major innovation", but the bottom line is the list is sparse. The
"game" does not evolve at a rapid pace.

Disappointing! I was raised on "Ender's Game"; I expected
 tactical revolution on a monthly basis.

Strategic Evolution in Games
----------------------------

We can't discuss strategic game evolution without discussing
chess. This is where the most human effort has gone in gaming. Chess
is very deep, but it has mostly been explored. The remaining deltas
are small and mostly explored by computers. Human subcultures are
[nested fractally](http://xkcd.com/1095/) so it remains interesting to
insiders, but there isn't that much left to innovate. There are no
fundamental open questions, and the famous gambits are resolved (such
as the viability of the [King's
Gambit](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King's_Gambit#History)). To a
first approximation chess is solved.

I would very much enjoy creating a brand new unseen game that was
strategically deep, and putting Vishy Anand, Ken Regan, and Tyler
Cowen in a room to fight it out. I want to see things that I've never
seen before, and I want to be amazed by a ["the enemy's gate is
down"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ender's_Game) play. But sadly,
that is not going to happen any time soon. But there are close
analogues.

Video Games as Sports
---------------------

Video Games today have a nascent competitive scene. Starcraft is
[serious business](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WiQmQhA-OrM) in
Korea. [League of
Legends](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/League_of_Legends#Tournaments)
and [Dota
2](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_International_%28video_gaming%29)
have tournaments with multi million dollar prize pools. I must confess
that I spent a couple years watching Starcraft 2 tournaments, and
recently have migrated to watching professional Dota 2.

The main appeal of esports (as is the popular cringeworthy moniker) is
in the rate of strategic innovation. There is a term for this in the
gaming subculture --- the "metagame", which is loosely defined as the
current understanding of the viability of various strategies. In Dota
2, the metagame evolves rapidly. What is considered the best strategy
today is eventually found wanting, and the metagame evolves to
accomodate this new finding. The chess equivalent would be the
historical viability of various
["schools"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schools_of_chess). One
example of the evolution of the Chess metagame would be the Romantic
school. It began to gain vogue in the early 19th century, but was
eventually refuted towards the end of the century and then fell
completely out of favor. However, the metagame no longer evolves. All
remaining changes are effectively minor increments in the current
metagame. There are no more fundamentally new contributions left in
chess.

Why Metagame Evolution
----------------------

Metagame evolution is not a given in esports. The main reason for it
is that the gaming community has an insatiable appetite for strategic
innovation, and actively embraces _rule changes_ in pursuit of more
innovation. If a strategy is discovered to be
[dominant](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strategic_dominance), the game
is modified to avoid stagnation. This is particularly easy because
rules are just computer code, and can be globally changed with a
single downloadable patch. But more importantly, the community is open
to such modifications.

Because of the tribal affiliations, rule changes are close to
impossible to push through in mainstream sports, as they would upset
the current leaders. When Formula 1 rules were changed in the early
2000s to end Michael Schumacher's unilateral dominance, there were
large cries of unfairness. But it had to be done in the interest of
keeping the game exciting. It is too constraining to restrict yourself
only to [Pareto
improvements](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pareto_efficiency). Yet
obvious simple rules that would make soccer more interesting
(post-game retrospective cards for diving, goal line technology,
bigger goals to compensate for increased goalkeeping skill and the
outsized influence of a single bad decision when games are low
scoring) are not allowed.

This metagame stagnation did not go unnoticed in Chess: Bobby Fischer
suggested [randomized starting
positions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chess960) to undo the
solidification of the opening metagame. But it did not catch on.

Metagame evolution is one of the most significant attractions of
esports, and there are hot debated what the "pocket strategies"
(winning strategies that teams have discovered that they choose to
keep secret until a key match) each team brings to the top
tournaments. When [this](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ldq1afiKQb8)
happens, everybody loses their minds. Crowds may go wild when there is
a 40 yard curling freekick, but that ultimately is not a moment of
brilliance. We praise them for perfection in execution, but not for
strategic genius. Pocket strategies are entertaining because they
truly are "the enemy's gate is down" moments.

Asymmetric Information Games
----------------------------

The second reason esports are more interesting to watch is in the
possibilities afforded by asymmetric information. The mainstream games
today (Starcraft, League, Dota 2) are all asymmetric: there is a
computer enforced ["fog of
war"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fog_of_war). Teams have incomplete
information of the other team's movements, and need to
"scout". Meanwhile spectators (and commentators) have full vision,
creating dramatic tension. This is not new to computer games: board
games like Stratego, Poker, Battleship are all asymmetric information
games. But esports have taken them to another level. It eludes me why
competitive board/card games are not a popular thing beyond Chess and
Go), with the singular exception of poker. Poker only caught on when
broadcasters figured out how to show the "hole cards" to the
television audience while they are still hidden from the other
players.

To really drive home the power of asymmetric information in games, I
quote Alfred Hitchcock:

> There is a distinct difference between "suspense" and "surprise,"
> and yet many pictures continually confuse the two. I'll explain what
> I mean.

> We are now having a very innocent little chat. Let's suppose that
> there is a bomb underneath this table between us. Nothing happens,
> and then all of a sudden, "Boom!" There is an explosion. The public
> is surprised, but prior to this surprise, it has seen an absolutely
> ordinary scene, of no special consequence. Now, let us take a
> suspense situation. The bomb is underneath the table and the public
> knows it, probably because they have seen the anarchist place it
> there. The public is aware the bomb is going to explode at one
> o'clock and there is a clock in the decor. The public can see that
> it is a quarter to one. In these conditions, the same innocuous
> conversation becomes fascinating because the public is participating
> in the scene. The audience is longing to warn the characters on the
> screen: "You shouldn't be talking about such trivial matters. There
> is a bomb beneath you and it is about to explode!"

> In the first case we have given the public fifteen seconds of
> surprise at the moment of the explosion. In the second we have
> provided them with fifteen minutes of suspense. The conclusion is
> that whenever possible the public must be informed. Except when the
> surprise is a twist, that is, when the unexpected ending is, in
> itself, the highlight of the story.

_This_ is what makes Dota so much fun to watch. We know what each team
is up to, but they do not. They walk into traps, they skirt death
unawares, and the audience gasps and shrieks. This is simply not
possible in live action sports (not until we have live laser tag
competitions with randomized, moving environments). 

Looking Ahead
-------------

Esports are primarily more entertaining due to the willingness of the
game creators to change it up. This might change in the future, once
vested interests and strong incumbent parties develop that are
resistant to losing their advantages. However, there is hope --- the
nimblest minds can thrive in fast evolving games without having to
rely on preserving a singular advantage. I hope I'm right, otherwise
I'll have to look for more intellectually entertaining game
communities to become popular. [Magic: The
Gathering](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magic:_The_Gathering), anyone?
Thank the Old Gods and the New that I'm off the [dating
market](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/blogpost/post/jon-finkel-magic-game-master-and-the-travails-of-dating-online/2011/08/30/gIQAHeIypJ_blog.html).
